Listening to radiolab radio from W. N y.
S. T. E. N. D. O. N. P. R. Okay.
I want to start the show today with a truly remarkable story,
which begins with this girl right here. Hello. I, I'm her Buxton.
Laura Buxton is her name. Remember that name sometime of hip hop and Laura,
let's do this like a movie. Okay. I can move it. Yeah. Okay.
Okay. It's June, 2001 yeah. Where are we? Oh,
we're in a little town in northern England called Daikon Tran Stoke on Trent.
There is Laura Buxton standing in her front yard. She is 10 years old,
well almost 10 whatever. She's a tall girl,
pretty tall for my age pigtails and in her hand she's holding a balloon.
A red balloon. You with me so far? Yup. She has written her name on the balloon.
Please return to Laura books then and then on the other side it had my address.
So there she is standing in the front yard with their balloon was very Wendy and
she holds her balloon up to the sky, to the heavens.
And I just let it go with the wind too.
Laughing and joking because we just thought it got stuck in a tree a bit further
down the road somewhere. That's not what happened. The balloon kept going.
All right, now I'm looking at a map here of England and stuff on transit.
The tops of the balloon would have had to go south,
like pound down down past Stratford. Yeah, past while sail past Wolverhampton,
then pass
Birmingham Pass Kidderminster Porchester pass millions of people shutting him.
People with different lives, different names, glove, Chester, Gloucester,
Gluster and all in all the red balloon goes about 140 miles south.
Exactly against the pervading wind, which is the southwest.
Finally, when this balloon is all the way on the other side of the country,
it begins to descend down, down, down,
and of all the places that could have landed, you know, in a river in effect,
three parking lot in the sea.
Instead the balloon touches down in the yard of this girl I live,
I live in the countryside in a little village called Melton little bone.
Just so you're not confused. This is a different girl than the first one.
They do sound the same, but they live on opposite ends of the country.
The building got stuck in our hedge,
but our next door neighbor found it and he thought it was just a bit of rubbish
and he collected it up.
Say the cows wouldn't eat it because he didn't want the cows to like choke on
the rubbish. And he was about to put in the bin like literally.
And then he saw the label thing, please send back to Nora Buxton.
And he was like, oh my God, why did he say,
Oh my God. Okay, so check this out.
Remember I told you how the first girl who sent the balloon was 10 the second
girl who received it in 10 years old. She's 10. Okay. Okay. No, wait,
there's more. Remember how I told her the first name was Laura Buxton?
Yeah. Well girl number two. Can you introduce yourself? Okay. Um, hi,
I'm Laura Buxton. What girl number one.
[inaudible]. They're both Fluoro Buxton. Yeah, no, both named Laura Buxton.
Yes. You heard me right?
A 10 year old girl named Laura Buxton. Let's go have a balloon.
That balloon floats 140 miles and lands in the yard of another 10 year old girl
named Laura Buxton. Is this for real? Yes.
I think it might be the strangest thing I've ever heard in my life.
It's pretty weird. So weird. We had to get them both into a studio.
So like we're going to hear Americans through these.
This balloon thing happened about eight years ago,
so both Loras are now 18 and they've actually become really good friends.
Anyhow, back to the story. I got the balloon. That's Lauren number two.
What did you think at that point? Um, well I,
I was quite young so I didn't really know what to think. I was just like,
I better write the letter because you know, there's someone else out like, oh,
Laura Bucks and I must see them.
So Laura number two wrote a letter to learn number one. Laura,
I think I put,
I'm 10 years old and I live in Welch and I found here prolene and thing is that
my name is Laura Buxton as well.
So lots of love from Lauren Buxton learn number one,
you get the notes through the post
opened up while I was in the kitchen and it was really quite confusing actually.
Okay. A short while later, the two Laura's meeting.
Then at that moment things get even weirder.
They realize when they see each other for the first time, oh my God.
Not only do we have the same name and are the same age, but we look the same,
same height, any and tall and same color hair on his hair.
And I remember the weirdest thing was that we were wearing really similar clays,
which I was taught. It was just so weird. What were you wearing?
Do you remember? Paint John Person.
Jean both had on pink jumpers and jeans and as they started to talk it just kept
getting weird. They've got a three year old black Labrador.
We both got a gray rabbit.
We both got Guinea pigs and they both brought their Guinea pigs with them that
day.
I remember lower t cause out of its cage and I had mind on my lap and we were
like, oh my God.
[inaudible]
they were identical. They look Brown,
but this sort of Beigey orange patch on the bottom,
like completely the same. I was just like,
oh my gosh, how is this happening?
[inaudible]
do you believe miracles either of you as a name? Would you call this miracle?
I'm not sure. I mean I guess it could be, but I think it's more of a case fee.
Yeah, I'd say it's more faith than American,
so you don't think that when the blue, the balloon was just went well.
If it was just wind, it was a very, very lucky wind.
The trans is just so likely. There be some kind of reason.
What kind of reason maybe we were meant to meet, I dunno,
but meant by who or what.
I mean, only time will tell.
It could actually be like preparedness for something else later in life.
Two days in Maryland. Grannies right out.
Just young and renters didn't drink ted.
I mean,
okay, what are you? Look what your, your you know what you are, what?
You're a destiny bully if you don't like cause like what do you bear?
You call me a Destiny's bully. Yes, because power band or something. No,
it's what you're doing to those girls.
You want them to act like they are somehow the subject of a miracle. No,
I wasn't trying to force God on them. If that's what you mean. Yes you are.
You're the one who says, oh who's behind? No.
The question I was trying to get at is like how should we think about that
story?
Do we live in a world where there's magic and meaning or is it all just chance?
[inaudible]
in fact, that's what we're going to do with this whole hour and radio.
Everything you've discussed, the role that chance plays in so many things.
Things like lottery tickets, sports coin flips,
even the cells inside our own body. You know what,
actually we could upgrade the whole thing and give the show a fancier name.
I've got a five syllable word that means randomness. Bring it three Latin name.
[inaudible] stochasticity skip this city.
I'm Jabbing Ron. I am Robert Krulwich. Stay with us.
[inaudible]
so let's start with a very basic question.
Let's a random sounds like it means random. That is,
anything can happen at the next turn of the wheel.
Like your phone ringing for example. Random. Sorry.
Although it happened so many times, they just no longer ran.
Yeah, it's completely predictable,
but it does have a very nice kind of built to it though.
Do you think I'm going to sing with it now
and now back to our regularly scheduled program.
So let me say that something remarkable happens like Dolores, like Dolores.
Can you tell whether this is just a random act of a,
of an indifferent universe or is there something truly miraculous and wonderful
about it? Excellent question. Thank you very much.
And it's a question that took us to Berkeley, California.
I'm Devin Nolan. I'm a professor of statistics at the University of California,
Berkeley,
and the reason we'd come to see Deb Nolan at Berkeley is because we'd heard that
she plays this game.
I like to incorporate lots of classroom activities and demos,
one in particular that has to do with a randomness to game that helps your
students understand what real randomness actually looks like.
That doesn't look like what you would think we call this. In any case,
it takes us into your classroom in a few stints and she sits us down.
We all sit down. We sit in there in a semicircle and then she explains,
okay, I'm going to divide the group up into two.
I'm going to divide it right here.
She splits us up to the group one and three of her students, Joe Chang,
Richard Liang, Margaret Taub group two Jad Abumrad,
Robert Krulwich is that spend in the group here. She's pointing it up.
I'm going to give you a penny and I'm going to ask you to flip the coin a
hundred times and the three of you, she points to her students.
Your job is to pretend to flip a coin,
meaning they just have to flip the coin in their heads.
How do you think that coin might land?
Produce a hundred fake coin flips and then Deb leaves the room.
So where students start whipping through their imaginary fake flips, sails,
tails, heads, tails, Wiley.
They actually flipped a hundred times. Heads,
tails, tails, tails, tails,
tails, heads.
But eventually we did finish it and both groups then put our strings of ancient
keys right there on blackboard.
And then Deb came back. Hello. Here they are. Huh?
Look,
okay. So on the board you've got two sets of H's and t's,
which looked pretty much the same to us. But she looked at their list,
the fakers, and then she looked at our list and right away she says,
pointing at our list. This is the real one. We were like, ah,
what? How did she do that? Well,
amazingly the way she knew had to do with one particular moment. Right.
Roll the tape back to a moment. Right at the beginning of it,
our coin,
three in a row,
we have way too many details.
Yeah.
Seven days in a row. It was really spooky.
Completely. Like at any moment a unicorn was going to come Gallup again.
That's how weird it was, but has magical and unbranded as it felt to us.
That's how she knew that we were the real flippers.
As soon as I saw the seven tails and then I looked over to the other board and
there weren't any longer than,
I think that's how she knew when we asked one of the guys on the other team,
why didn't you put more streaks in your flips? Um, well he said, well,
I think we'd all say, I was thinking if we did that too much,
maybe it should recognize that we were actually doing that on purpose.
In other words, those streaks just feel wrong.
And that's the thing about randomness. Real randomness.
When you see it just doesn't feel random enough.
[inaudible]
Bob says that the truth is strange things do happen by chance.
why is this hard for us to emotionally accept this? Well,
it finally made sense was when we spoke to this guy, Chad, I Robert,
that's Jake Koehler.
I'm a professor of finance and professor of law at Arizona State University.
So here's how the epiphany happened.
We were explaining to Jay the Unicorn experience at Deb's classroom.
We've got one tail and we've got a second, then we've got a third,
then we got to seven in somewhere in the conversation we started to do the math.
Okay, what actually are the odds? Let me see. It was it heads in a row,
tails in a row, pale seven tails in a row.
That's one half raised to the seventh power.
So we started to do the calculations and at first look pretty good,
chip 0.0 the little more than 1% just over 1% chance. Yeah.
So it seemed to first that what had had happened in Deb's class was super
unlikely. Right?
But then Soren producers had to go and say this,
to be fair, you should tell him that you actually flip the coin a hundred times.
Oh, now wait, wait. Did you, you were holding back on me. Wait, wait,
no. That's why we have sorn here.
Are you saying that somewhere in the a hundred flips you've gotta run up seven?
That's what we're saying. That's not a particularly good coincidence.
I'm sorry to burst the bucket, you mean? And then Jay explained it to us.
Uh, if you're just doing seven flips, then yeah,
getting seven in a row is really unlikely.
But if you're doing multiple sets of seven, 14 of those sets of seven,
which we work,
we were doing a hundred then the profitability starts to add up and start small
like 1% if not one becomes two, which should become score,
which becomes eight until when it's all said and done,
the chances of getting seven tales neuro somewhere in a set of a hundred is
don't hold your breath about one in six chance, one in six.
That's it. That you would have gotten a string of seven.
So what felt spooky and almost twilight zone ish in the moment is actually
probable. Oh, see, that's why you don't want to know it.
It doesn't confirm your goosebumps. No, I think the goosebumps are dead now.
Oh, I'm sorry to do that. I still enjoy life.
The problem says that we were so focused on those seven flips in a row.
We'd forgotten about the other 93 that weren't seven in a row.
We'd forgotten about what he calls the background. We were too zoomed in.
So you've got to back the camera up and pan around and look at the complete
sample space. And when you do that, he says,
what you will realize is that the thing that felt so special,
suddenly you see that it's not so odd and it's real context.
And this sad lesson goes way beyond coins. He gave us this example,
1985 and 1986 Evelyn Adams of New Jersey wins the lottery twice back to back of
years. Crazily improbable, right? So if you zoom in all the way in,
there she is.
Evelyn Adams standing outside of a convenience store somewhere in New Jersey.
Hi.
She is completely blown away for good reason.
The opposite that those two particular tickets would become winning lottery
tickets are one in 17 point 3 trillion out,
but Jay would say if you pan the camera back way from Madeline,
if you look at the old world of people buying lottery tickets at this vantage
point, you can begin to ask a different question.
What are the odds that somebody somewhere,
somebody somewhere win a lottery twice and in fact,
the answer to that is it would be very surprising if it didn't happen repeatedly
and it has happened repeatedly really. For instance, in Connecticut,
employees have a place called the shuttle meadow country club.
They won twice a man in Pennsylvania.
He won twice a few years later in California,
retiree on a fantasy five and the super lotto in the same day
that were calculated one in 23 point 5 trillion
that's trillion with a t one way I think to to think about this whole thing.
I think one example that sort of brings it all home,
at least it did for me when I thought about the blade in the grass paradox.
The Golfer hits the ball down the fairway and the ball lands on a particular
blade of grass. If the blade of grass could talk, you know, the,
the blade of grass would say, wow God,
what are the odds that that ball out of all the billions of blades of grass and
me, it lands on me? How did it come to be? That just landed on me? I don't know.
It's sort of like a miracle and it is sort of miraculous,
but what we know is that it was going to land on some blade of grass somewhere.
So it's nearly a hundred percent chance that some blade of grass was going to
say, wow, what are the odds that that ball was going to land on me?
And if I were that blade of grass, I'd feel so special and chosen and crushed
soar. The real lesson here,
according to Jay Kohler and also Deb Nolan before him,
is that if you don't see past yourself,
you fall prey to, you know, superstition or magical thinking.
You have to be careful that you're not finding meaning here. When,
when it's just coincidence as coincidence, just coincidence.
But there are some things like the Loras that will never feel like just
coincidence. It was just wind. It was a very, very lucky wind.
So we had the ask. I asked you sir, is this a miracle?
This is not a miracle. It's a good story. But you know,
there are lots of little things I could pick at in the store, you know. Exactly.
Pick away. Well, I mean, you know, Laura Buxton didn't find the balloons.
Somebody else who knew a Laura Buxton found the below you selected out the
features that match and trust me,
somebody checked to see if she wasn't identical twin. It's a no, no,
that's not a good one. Skip the twin. Okay. How many brothers and sisters? Oh,
not the same number, bro. Skip that. Ah, they both have a rabbit.
Let's put that one in the story to be totally honest. He's, he's right. Well,
I uh, when I was interviewing Dolores, I asked him a bunch of questions,
kinda scouting for similarities. It's your favorite color, both of you pink.
Scrap that. And what do you guys study in school? Biology, chemistry,
and geography.
Whereas I'm doing English and history and classical civilization scrap that.
What people do is they try to make the story better by showing more
similarities.
So you're saying that somebody could imagine who doctored the story,
by the way, I don't want to spoil anything and this is a trivial comment,
but I believe that one of the girls was actually nine and the other one was 10.
Oh, well that's the story through it. Never mind.
I'm sorry to be your most depressing guess. Nonetheless,
I will continue to tell the larger story every chance I get on the air at
parties, wherever, because you know,
damn the statistics just makes me feel good. I think Jay would agree with you.
Well, it first of all, we love stories that connects us. It makes,
it gives us insight into our own lives. Um,
and I think it also gives us a feeling that life is magical
and maybe we don't have to call it magic to enjoy the experience. In fact,
I was talking to the Laura's and I asked them,
what if a statistician would walk in the room right now and say to you,
this was bound to happen? Statistically,
this was going to happen sometime to someone. Fair enough. Really,
because it just happens to be us in those statistics though. I mean,
if that's what the statistician thinks, I mean, yeah, I game to him.
They don't really care where they see it. Whatever was in that wind,
whether it was fate or just wind, doesn't matter.
We brought them together and now.